Well
today
is November the 16th and I'm interviewing Dr. Dan
Householder who has been at Texas A&M since 1975
and we're going to talk about, has been in the
Department of Industrial and Vocational
Education, IBTE. And we're going to talk a little
bit about changes and things that have happened at
Texas A&M in the last few years and what kinds of
things have affected these changes from your
perception. And you have been department head for
the last 10 years. So a lot of things have happened
in this department, I'm sure, as well as in the
college and from your perceptions, what have been
some of the major changes? You could start with
your department as you see it, and then maybe go on
into the college itself or vice versa. Well, the
college has certainly come along trying to meet
contemporary needs. I think when I came here,
there was something of a dichotomy between the
research-oriented doctoral programs and the
heavy emphasis on meeting public school needs,
which certainly reflected the leadership that
had been here before. But in industrial
education, there had been a doctoral program
started in 63, which is some six years before there
was a college of education. Who was instrumental
in that, do you know? Well, yes. That really grew
out of Chris Donovan's work and
Eric Blaisman's work. They were in the College of
Engineering. And the Department of Industrial
Education started the industrial technology
program, the industrial distribution program,
and the engineering technology programs. When
the College of Education was formed, Dr. Boone
moved to the college with Dr. Les Hawkins and Don
Clark. The other people stayed in engineering and
built the technology program. If you would
identify a pivotal time in the life of this
department, that was certainly it. And opinions
differ still about whether that was a wise move in
that programs in industrial education rely so
heavily on the technologies that you can't get in a
college of education. So if you look across the
country, doctoral programs in our field that have
a strong technological base have a big advantage
over those that are housed in colleges of
education, where there's this tendency not to
want to deal with the laboratories and not to want
to deal with the technical instruction. That is a
tendency in the colleges of education? Yes. Not
just here. Interesting. OK. But all that happened
long before I came. OK. So then what started
happening when you came? I came here because of the
strength of the doctoral program in industrial
ed. I'd known it for a long time. And we've ranked
third for a number of years behind Ohio State and
Maryland. So, well, over the years, as fields have
evolved, some things have been put positive and
some negative. You see a lot of growing strength in
educational technology, for instance, which was
started by this department, I understand, long
before I came here. The safety education program
was developed quite a bit. That was course started
and the
department is still there. The copy center began
in this department. We're still dealing, I think,
a lot with the role of the department and maybe the
college in preparing for the school teachers.
And, of course, recent developments with homes
and whatever have put that in even more jeopardy.
No one is quite
sure what happens. What the consequences are, the
results or whatever, or how long it's going to take
to see them. Well, that's going to be a biggie. Are
there other things, were there some political or
sociological or even psychological, I mean,
philosophical changes? influences that might
have had an effect on some of the changes that came
about in the department?
Do you have a department philosophy for starters?
Unfortunately, no. The group has never really
developed a coherent position. They're really a
group of specialists who each want autonomy in
their own specialty. Now I think in one sense the
department has reflected in MicroCollege and the
stresses that go between folks who are very
interested in research and uninterested in
teacher education to people who are very
interested in teacher education and relatively
less interested in research. And in fact, I'm not
sure the college has ever been deeply committed to
research. I'm
sure that the department's ambiguities reflect
that or maybe are maintained partially because of
our lack of a coherent statement. Whether we are
really a research college of education or a
service college of education. What do you think
they tend to lean more to? The emphasis in the
college has gone clearly toward undergraduate
teacher education. You
mean right now, or it has been going? Throughout
our history. OK. Do you foresee any changes in
that? Yes, I think that is changing, and it seems
almost imperative that it changes. If the college
is to build its stature among other colleges of
education,
If the college wants to serve the schools of Texas,
it probably won't do it at the research base, much
as we talk about this. But researchers are
hard-nosed people who don't worry so much about
the outcomes. And educators, teachers, and
teacher educators tend to worry more about
processes and the development of the individual
rather than the search for. Semi-pro.
Semi-pro. Even a good generalization is hard to
come by without being a hard-nosed researcher.
Well,
that's one of the questions that I had about
whether or not or to what extent the college was
achieving its mission or maybe this Department of
Teaching, Research, and Service. And how did the
department balance it And how do you balance your
own, according to your own philosophy? Do you put
equal emphasis on all, or are there some that are
more important? Well, the model of the
teacher-researcher
professional servant, I think, is a generally
accepted one. But you can't do all those things all
the time equally well. I just came back from
chairing a conference in Chicago, and I chair this
thing every year and have now for eight years. It's
an enormous commitment to professional service
to one organization. I've been trying to just
guess a month a year maybe that I spend on this one
activity. Our college, and certainly in the
department, has made really major commitments to
service to professional organizations. I don't
know that that's wrong, But I don't think we've
been willing to face its cost in terms of research
productivity and in terms of teaching
effectiveness. Because you aren't teaching when
you're away from campus. And our college has a
strong commitment to professional service.
What organization are you referring to in this
case? Well, this is the Mississippi Valley
Industrial Teacher Education Conference that I
was finished chairing. You're saying that
everybody tends to do a lot of this? In our
department, everybody has been very active in
their professional organizations. All of the
senior faculty have been presidents of some
organization, of some major organization. And
that's really more service than anything else?
Yes, I perceive that as a strong service. It's
service to the profession. And some of the people
who haven't yet been presidents are, for
instance, on editorial boards where they read
manuscripts. It's one of those behind the scenes
things that takes hours and hours and hours of
faculty time and doesn't really generate
anything but one line in a vitae, if they remember
it. a number of the people have been pretty
committed to service to the public schools. That
has, it seems to me, vacillated over time, that is,
if you look back over a long-term perspective.
Different groups have been effective in serving
different clienteles over, during different
periods. Sometimes you meet the need, sometimes
you move on to other things, but They'll work with
local service agencies, say that Dr. Parrish does
with Vocational Special Needs and the agencies
that serve those people. It's in, by our
definition, the service category. We've not, I
think, balanced teaching and research as well as
we would lie. And as I say, in my opinion, they are
almost dichotomous interests One requires a wait
and see attitude. The other is I can make it better.
And if you're committed to making it better,
you'll never wait and see. And I see relatively few
in our college who've been really deeply
committed to research. In the whole college, not
just in your department. Yes, and it's certainly
true in the department, and I see it true in the
college. I get the feeling from other interviews
that the EDs EPSI department feels very strongly
that they're much more committed to research than
anybody else. They certainly feel that way.
They're all very vocal. They certainly feel that
way. They certainly feel that way. Okay. Now, the
growth since you arrived and since you've been
here has been phenomenal. And I'm assuming in the
department, has the department grown much? No.
The only growing program in the department left
the department. Which was? Educational
technology. Where did it go? To
interdisciplinary
education. How does that come about? Why did it
leave and why does it fit in there better? I'm not
familiar at all with that process. Well, I'm not
certain that I want to comment about that on the
record. It was never discussed with me before it
was done. As far from my perspective, it was an
arbitrary administrative action. How long has
that been? Has that been? A year ago last month, 15.
OK. So then what is the size of the department right
now, student-wise? Do you have just more or less a?
I don't have the data. Well, that's right. You're
not department head right now. OK. But our
undergraduate enrollments have been declining
for the past several years. And we are fighting
along with everybody else in our field to maintain
graduate enrollments. The peculiar thing that we
cannot maintain graduate enrollments, we
cannot, and this is true not just here, it's true at
Ohio State, it's true at Maryland, it's true at
Illinois, it's true at Minnesota. And in our
conference, we're very concerned about where our
future generations of teacher educators come
from. Because graduate programs, advanced
graduate programs, are not preparing a number of
people that the demand surveys indicate are
needed. In just industrial and vocational?
Industrial and vocational technical education.
I'm not going to try to speak about the others,
because this group that I just met with deals with
industrial teacher education. And that's the
group that we had some papers on this this time.
Does the pendulum swing back and forth on that, or
has it continued to decline steadily? It's really
hard to tell. I tend right now toward a great deal of
pessimism in that I cannot identify a dean of
education who thinks that industrial education
or technical education is important. We're in the
midst of a major back-to-basics
move. It's just not popular to say. It may be right
or it may be wrong. The people may be right now. But
it is not popular to say we should strengthen
industrial education.
Collaboration among the department that you have
been And again, I'm referring to this one because
you were head of the department for the last 10
years, so that's the one that I'm focusing on
because I don't know enough about that department
to have a feel for it. Was there a lot of
collaboration among, well, within departments
and then among this department with other
departments in the college? Well, my... I think
there's a disappointingly low level of
collaboration with the department. There has
been some, in bits of referral, collaborative
efforts. Not only with other, actually, some
better with people outside the college than with
others within the college.
It's one of those things that I've puzzled over a
great deal and not been able to diagnose.
My perception has been that our group has wanted to
collaborate, but has not been successful as it
would like to be in that process. In the college?
Yes. Does the specialization that you were
talking about earlier have something to do with
the fact that everybody is . I think that people
might have, I don't know whether people have a
narrow image of the professionals who work in the
group or not. That could be the case. It's an
interesting dynamic, which I don't have
diagnosed.
But department heads do not collaborate in this
college. Department heads have never shared
secrets, have always viewed them, in my
experience, have always viewed themselves as
competing.
No, there's never even an opportunity for
department heads to meet without the dean staff
being present. Competing for resources, you
think? In my opinion, that has been a major
inhibiting factor from the time I've been here.
The idea that the leadership comes from the dean's
office instead of growing out of the group that can
facilitate the interaction. And it's been my
impression that
collaboration among department heads is viewed
negatively from all levels above and below rather
than being a way for things to occur. All of the
inquiry groups did not look at helping department
heads departments collaborate. They look at
giving faculty the kind of collaborative
opportunities they were looking for. But faculty
have never seen... We're in a peculiar
organizational dilemma in this college because
we have a formal structure and it's as if that
formal structure is set aside and used only to do
some things. What is the formal structure that you
refer to? Well, the departmental structure. Oh,
okay. As compared to, say, a faculty structure
that some universities have or program
structures that some universities have. So the
university expects department heads to perform
in a peculiar way, but never to collaborate. There
is not anything that rewards collaboration.
Interesting. You hit a sensitive point with that
question. Well, I haven't gotten as strong a
response from a lot of people. Maybe a lot of people
are not being candid enough with me, but I have not
gotten that strong. Everybody has said there's
not enough, and we should do better, but nobody has
said it. I may not be right about this, but it's
really important
to know that after only a few months away from this
role, it's difficult to see the positive things
that may have been going on.
For instance, I think we did a lot of collaborative
things with educational technology, but then
when educational technology chose to leave,
there wasn't any discussion of what would be the
best for all people concerned. The decision was, I
mean, the move was made by going around the group
that it facilitated. So I don't think that's
collaboration by any definition. And I've never
chosen to seek out as if one might try to diagnose
what's going on there. But it certainly does
diminish one's interest in doing more
collaboration.
Good. Perceptions. And you've touched on a little
bit about perceptions of outsiders and how this
college is viewed. a little bit about how certain
departments in the college are viewed in
reference to other similar colleges or similar
education. As you work with these organizations
and travel a lot and go outside of here, what do you
feel is the perception of others towards the
college? And is A&M still number three behind like
it was when you came in this department?
You've got to look at it in different ways. I was
only talking about the doctoral program. That's
right, you were. That program has, until this
year, maintained its visibility and stature. We
draw people from all across the country, some
international students, and we place people. The
VOED program has never made it to the top ranks.
It's much younger, and has not had the faculty and
students since the fellowship program was
discontinued. Oh, by much younger. How young is
it? Do you know? No. OK. Was it before the College of
Education came in to be? I don't think so. It was the
EPDA fellowship program. Oh, OK. It was all to
identify that starting date. OK. It seems like it
would have been in the late 60s, but I don't think
the program had started before the college was
formed. I wasn't here. Okay. Did you work under
both Beans? Yes. Okay. And Lindbacher in between.
And Lindbacher. Okay. Tell me a little bit about
the differences, and I've gotten a lot on the
leadership styles, and it's obvious, it's a
tremendous change, but From your department,
what were some of the changes or some of the
differences in just the everyday running of the
department under the two administrations? And
even Limbocker's. I haven't really focused on
that interim year. That interim year was a
devastating year for this department. How so? The
laboratory building next door was being
renovated that year. There were no laboratories
at all. We had equipment in the basement of this
building and were teaching our undergraduate
classes in the basement of this building in the
hallway. And I could get no support from the dean to
seek other space on a temporary basis or do
anything. And we, in essence, undid our
undergraduate program during that time. We had,
until then, we had absolutely a top-flight group
of undergraduate students. And because the
dean's office was totally disinterested in what
we needed with this situation. So that was a
disaster year for us. And it had nothing to do with
personalities, because I got along fine with all
three people. But because of our lack of
leadership, lack of commitment, we really
suffered. Now, what is the deal across the street
that you refer to? What laboratory or what goes on
over there? Our undergraduates have to be
prepared to teach their technical subjects
somewhere. And during that era, we could not get
any of them into any of the engineering technology
courses. We were having the same problem that
every freshman counselor has been having this
year. All the engineering technology courses
were full if one of our students got in. And we were
requiring them. So we had to develop our own
courses. which means we had to have our own
laboratories or someplace to teach them. And we
had a woodworking, metalworking, power,
construction, manufacturing, and plastics
courses, which we got squenched down into one room
for all those.
Well, there is more, because the original dean
that is original to me, well, the original dean
fostered the crafts program, which had a lab here
and a lab in the other building. And that program
moved to environmental design
somewhat more amicably than the educational
technology
movement. What was the dean's? attitude or what
was their comparison or contrast between the
attitude towards the department from the two
administrations?
I don't know. It seemed to me that
both have at times indicated strong support.
Probably neither has been able to demonstrate the
level of commitment that one would like to see. I
don't think anyone in the department has ever felt
full-fledged support on a continuing basis,
which is a major concern, I think. So that's asking
the impossible of an administration, but that's
what people would like to have. Continuous
commitment. Yeah, continuous commitment. And we
have not been newsmakers. Teaching people how to
earn a living or teaching people how to teach
people how to earn a living is not very glamorous.
It doesn't match up with math and science. But a
whole lot more people have to learn to do it. And in
terms of the social value of our field, I think
we've been basically unrecognized at the
college. Now that you're out of the department, I
don't know if you have any kind of a vision, or if you
did beforehand, about where it's going. And I know
there's new laws and all these are going to affect
that department as well as all of the others. Do you
have a little crystal ball, or did you, about where
you think these things are going? Well, I did have,
and it's been surprised quite a bit lately. It has
been what? My crystal ball has been surprised
lately.
I really feel that The department right now is in a
very ambiguous situation. And it's difficult for
me to be really objective since I'm only a few
months away from it, and since I still have an
appointment in it, but since I don't have any real
influence in it. And I refuse to try to influence in
the filibustering sense or in the political way.
But it's a very uncomfortable time. for the
faculty, and
the group really needs to be able to work its value
with a better sense of purpose than it has. It's
being asked again to clarify its mission, and...
But again, what do you mean? Has it been asked to do
this? Well, we spent a good share of last year in a
self-study, Which, well, I'm being very frank
with you there. I really
hope you'll be. True. Okay. And people are so
concerned.
What is, what are you? Center for Career
Development, is the way that's called. But yours
is, oh, I see. Why, why did they name that? Well, it
was named that during the era when career
education was a big thing, and Chris Warman was
doing a bunch of career everything, and, and
Hubert put together the name and named it, and it
didn't, the name didn't go away, but we've not been
able to find anyone who wants to fund anything I
think we would have been better off to have said,
you know, cancel that name because the name is such
a handicap. But you're catching me on an actual
rock and a block. That's okay. I need that. I should
get into town before 2.30 then. That's right.
Before you're going to do an interview. Okay. You
said the last thing you said was that you had spent a
great deal of last year in a self-study. Yes. Okay.
And What were you pleased with the results, or did
the results indicate? This is a really awkward
thing. Because our faculty really felt, I'm
interpreting faculty, but the dean just insisted
that we bring in some outside consultants and do a
self study. Then he intervened a couple of times,
and that generated some resistance. And at about
the time the faculty senate asked their
recommendation that department head tenure
should be limited to 10 years, some faculty
members stopped participating in the search for
consensus. Now it appears that we're being asked
again what to do. what to recommend to the dean with
regard to programs, departmental emphasis. And
as I said before, we don't have a cohesive group.
We've got a group of individual specialists, each
in their own area. It's as if you had one reading
person, one science person, one social studies
person. And you say, now what are we all ought to be
doing? And one says we ought to be doing reading,
and another says we ought to be doing math, and
another says we ought to be doing science, and
another says we ought to be doing social studies.
Now, this faculty senate thing, is that something
new about a 10-year department head limit? Yes. I
hadn't heard that one. That came into effect last
year, as I was in my 10th year, more than halfway
through it. OK. I hadn't heard about that one. I
don't think that's necessarily a bad thing. I was
at a very awkward spot in my own career. And it
absolutely destroyed my ability to lead the
group, if the group was leadable. But things have
really, departmental consensus has really
degenerated since that time, as I perceive it. I
think that the department has got to feel some
security and support, and it doesn't appear to me
likely that that will occur under an interim head.
There's no search for a clear statement that there
will be one. So it's a real uncomfortable time
right now for people.